doc: extend Matter security section (#14391)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/matter/end_product/security.rst

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 3

Nordic Matter samples leverage security features supported in the |NCS| that can be divided into three major categories:

* Cryptography
* Trusted storage
* Securing production devices

In the following sections you will learn more details about each listed category.

Cryptography
************

Depending on networking backend is use |NCS| Matter samples currently use the following APIs to implement cryptographic operations:

* PSA Cryptography API for Thread networking variant
* Mbed TLS for Wi-Fi networking variant

Both APIs are integrated in :ref:`nrf_security` library.
This library offers various configuration possibilities and backends that can be employed to implement :ref:`cryptographic operations <cryptographic_operations_in_ncs>`.
You can find an overview of cryptography layer configuration supported for each |NCS| Matter-enabled platform in `Matter platforms security support`_ section.

Trusted storage
***************

The :ref:`Trusted Storage <trusted_storage_in_ncs>` in the |NCS| is a security mechanism designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.

> Such component is essential for IoT devices and it allows to implement secure communication between devices within the Matter ecosystems.

Author: Doesn't it sound like Matter devices are the only IoT devices possible? :)

Maybe: 
The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation secure communication between devices, **for instance**, within the Matter ecosystems.

> Such component is essential for IoT devices and it allows to implement secure communication between devices within the Matter ecosystems.

Reviewer: Now that you mention, I'm not sure we need the Matter part for this sentence, since it is stated clearly on Line 41. So just:
```suggestion
The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation of secure communication between devices.
```

* non-volatile - while data is being written to the non-volatile memory

In the case of volatile context, the Trusted Storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`).
AEAD can be configured with the set of Kconfig options described in the :ref:`Trusted Storage configuration <trusted_storage_configuration>` section.

An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`Hardware Unique Key (HUK) library <lib_hw_unique_key>` for that purpose.
HUK support is automatically enabled with :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible platforms.
Note that, due to hardware limitations, this library is not available for nRF52840 family.
In that case, the AEAD keys can be derived with SHA-256 hash (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`) but this approach is less secure than using HUK for key derivation as it will only provide integrity of sensitive material.

> It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD keys generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.

Author: Applying now, but I will need to modify the merit a bit after discussion with @LuDuda.

You can find an overview of Trusted Storage layer configuration supported for each |NCS| Matter-enabled platform in `Matter platforms security support`_ section.

Matter platforms security support
*********************************

> The following table summarizes current security configuration and features supported for Matter-enabled hardware platforms in |NCS|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following table summarizes the current security configuration and features supported for Matter-enabled hardware platforms in the |NCS|.
```

.. list-table:: Matter platforms security support
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Platform
     - Networking backend
     - Cryptography API
     - Cryptography backend
     - ARM TrustZone support
     - Trusted Storage backend
     - Trusted Storage AEAD key

>    * - nRF52840

Reviewer: For all of the platforms, should they be SoC, SiP, or DK?

Author: SoC, I'd say.

     - Thread
     - PSA
     - Oberon
     - No
     - Trusted Storage library
     - SHA-256 hash
   * - nRF5340
     - Thread
     - PSA
     - Oberon
     - Yes
     - Trusted Storage library
     - Hardware Unique Key (HUK)
   * - nRF5340 + nRF7002
     - Wi-Fi
     - Mbed TLS
     - Oberon
     - Yes
     - Trusted storage library

>      - Hardware Unique Key (HUK)

Reviewer 2: Are you sure that we use HUK for the WiFi variant? I guess it may be correct regarding internal WiFi security, but I'm not sure that all of them use HUK.

Reviewer 3: Trusted Storage is not used for our Wi-Fi solution yet. We also discussed few other points about HUK which needs to be changed F2F, so i believe one more update is comming :)

* `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation
*  The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` |NCS| software library

Currently all :ref:`matter_samples` in the |NCS| use the trusted storage library as a trusted storage backend for all supported platforms.

The trusted storage library provides confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity for the assets it operates on.
It handles sensitive data in two contexts:

* Volatile - Before data is forwarded to the non-volatile storage and after it is retrieved from the non-volatile storage.
* Non-volatile - While data is being written to the non-volatile memory.

In the case of the volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`).
AEAD can be configured with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:`trusted_storage_configuration` section.

An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` (HUK) library.

> HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible platforms.
> .. note::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible platforms.

.. note::
```
Breaks doc build.

Author: Yep, I will do rebase anyway. @wiba-nordic  FYI, To facilitate review process I will add two commits, one will incorporate the original contribution + your change requests and the second will modify information regarding HUK. I can then make one final rebase eventually.

Cryptography
************

Depending on the networking backend, the |NCS| Matter samples currently use the following APIs to implement cryptographic operations:

* PSA Cryptography API for Thread networking.
* Mbed TLS for Wi-Fi networking (it is planned to support PSA Cryptography API for Wi-Fi backend as well).

Both APIs are integrated in the :ref:`nrf_security` library.
This library offers various configuration possibilities and backends that can be employed to implement :ref:`cryptographic operations <cryptographic_operations_in_ncs>`.
You can find an overview of the cryptography layer configuration supported for each |NCS| Matter-enabled platform in the :ref:`matter_platforms_security_support` section.

Trusted storage
***************

:ref:`trusted_storage_in_ncs` is a security mechanism designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.
The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation of secure communication between devices.

The Trusted Storage can utilize one of the following backends to implement PSA Certified Secure Storage API:

> * TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT) - Only if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation is supported by the platform in use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).
  This can only be utilized if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.
```

> * The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` |NCS| software library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` |NCS| software library.
```

Currently all :ref:`matter_samples` in the |NCS| use the trusted storage library as a Trusted Storage backend for all supported platforms.

The trusted storage library provides confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity for the assets it operates on.
It handles sensitive data in two contexts:

* Volatile - Before data is forwarded to the non-volatile storage and after it is retrieved from the non-volatile storage.
* Non-volatile - While data is being written to the non-volatile memory.

> In the case of the volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the case of the non-volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`).
```
Right? Data is encryptem in NVM, but decrypted to RAM for Trusted Storage library option.

Author: discussed f2f

AEAD can be configured with the set of Kconfig options described in the library's :ref:`trusted_storage_configuration` section.

An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` (HUK) library.
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible configurations.

> Currently, the :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` library is not supported for nRF52840 Matter-enabled devices.
> Instead, in this case, AEAD keys are derived with a SHA-256 hash (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`).
> This approach is less secure than using the library for key derivation as it will only provide integrity of sensitive material.
> It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD keys generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.
> 
> .. note::

Reviewer: Formatting Lukasz' suggestion:
```suggestion
The HUK library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for :ref:`matter_samples` in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 platform.

* For the nRF5340 platform, the HUK is generated at first boot and stored in the Key Management Unit (KM).
  No changes to the existing partition layout are needed for products in the field.
* For the nRF52840 platform, AEAD keys are derived with a SHA-256 hash (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`).
  This approach is less secure than using the library for key derivation as it will only provide integrity of sensitive material.
  It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD keys generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.

```
This suggestion makes the content in the note part of the bullet for the nRF52840 platform as a second paragraph.

>    Using HUK library in the case of nRF52840 is possible, yet it requires employing b0 bootloader that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Using the HUK library with nRF52840 SoC is possible, but it requires employing a ``b0`` bootloader that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.
```
Could also use :ref:`bootloader` to link to nRF Secure Immutable Bootloader if that is intended instead of ``b0``.

>    Note that adding another partition in the FLASH layout implies breaking the firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.

Author: Applied.

.. _matter_platforms_security_support:

Matter platforms security support
*********************************

The following table summarizes the current security configuration and features supported for Matter-enabled hardware platforms in the |NCS|.
This is a reference configuration that can be modified in the production firmware by using proper Kconfig settings or implementing custom cryptographic backends.

.. list-table:: Matter platforms security support
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Platform
     - Networking backend
     - Cryptography API
     - Cryptography backend
     - ARM TrustZone support
     - Trusted Storage backend
     - Trusted Storage AEAD key
   * - nRF52840 SoC
     - Thread
     - PSA
     - Oberon + CryptoCell [1]_
     - No
     - Trusted Storage library
     - SHA-256 hash
   * - nRF5340 SoC
     - Thread
     - PSA
     - Oberon + CryptoCell [1]_
     - Yes
     - Trusted Storage library
     - Hardware Unique Key (HUK)
   * - nRF5340 SoC + nRF7002 companion IC
     - Wi-Fi
     - Mbed TLS
     - Oberon + CryptoCell [1]_
     - Yes
     - -
     - -

> .. [1] The CryptoCell backend is used in parallel with the Oberon to implement only two components:
>          * Random Number Generation (RNG).
>          * AEAD keys derivation driver (only in the case of the Thread networking).
>        For all other cryptographic operations, the Oberon backend is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. [1] The CryptoCell backend is used in parallel with the Oberon backend.
       It is only used to implement Random Nuber Generation (RNG), and the AED keys derivation driver (only for Thread networking).
       For all other cryptographic operations, the Oberon backend is used.
```
Unfortunately, it seems bullets don't work in the doc build. It would have been clearer with them.

Trusted storage
***************

:ref:`trusted_storage_in_ncs` is a security mechanism designed to securely store and manage sensitive data, such as cryptographic keys, device credentials, and configuration data.
The mechanism is essential for IoT devices, as it allows the implementation of secure communication between devices.

The Trusted Storage can utilize one of the following backends to implement PSA Certified Secure Storage API:

* TF-M Platform Root of Trust (PRoT).
  This can only be utilized if the `ARM TrustZone`_ technology and hardware-accelerated firmware isolation are supported by the platform in use.
* The :ref:`trusted_storage_readme` |NCS| software library.

Currently all :ref:`matter_samples` in the |NCS| use the trusted storage library as a Trusted Storage backend for all supported platforms.

The trusted storage library provides confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity for the assets it operates on.
It handles sensitive data in two contexts:

* Volatile - Before data is forwarded to the non-volatile storage and after it is retrieved from the non-volatile storage.
* Non-volatile - When data is written to the non-volatile memory in encrypted form.

> In the case of the volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`) to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are being securely stored in the non-volatile memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of the volatile context, the trusted storage library leverages the Authenticated Encryption with Associated Data (AEAD) encryption backend (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD`).
It is used to encrypt and decrypt the assets that are being securely stored in the non-volatile memory.
```

An important setting, that depends on the hardware platform in use, is the way of generating the AEAD keys.
The recommended and the most secure option is to use :ref:`lib_hw_unique_key` (HUK) library.
HUK support is automatically enabled with the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_DERIVE_FROM_HUK` Kconfig option for compatible configurations.

The HUK library is supported for both the nRF52840 and nRF5340 platforms, but for :ref:`matter_samples` in the |NCS|, it is only enabled for the nRF5340 platform:

* For the nRF5340 platform, the HUK is generated at first boot and stored in the Key Management Unit (KMU).
  No changes to the existing partition layout are needed for products in the field.
* For the nRF52840 platform, AEAD keys are derived with a SHA-256 hash (:kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_HASH_UID`).
  This approach is less secure than using the library for key derivation as it will only provide integrity of sensitive material.
  It is also possible to implement a custom AEAD keys generation method when the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_TRUSTED_STORAGE_BACKEND_AEAD_KEY_CUSTOM` Kconfig option is selected.

> Using the HUK library with nRF52840 SoC is possible, but it requires employing the :ref:`bootloader` that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.
> Note that adding another partition in the FLASH layout implies breaking the firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Using the HUK library with nRF52840 SoC is possible, but it requires employing the :ref:`bootloader` that would generate the AEAD key at first boot and store it in the dedicated HUK partition that can be accessed only by the CryptoCell peripheral.
  Note that adding another partition in the FLASH layout implies breaking the firmware backward compatibility with already deployed devices.
```
